---
title: 'New Paper "NanoGalaxy: Nanopore long-read sequencing data analysis in Galaxy"'
date: '2020-10-23'
tease: New paper in GigaScience
doi: 10.1093/gigascience/giaa105
tags: [paper]
supporters:
- unifreiburg
subsites: [eu, freiburg, global, us]
main_subsite: freiburg
---

_Abstract_ - Long-read sequencing can be applied to generate very long contigs and even completely assembled genomes at relatively low cost and with minimal sample preparation. As a result, long-read sequencing platforms are becoming more popular. 

In this respect, the Oxford Nanopore Technologies–based long-read sequencing “nanopore" platform is becoming a widely used tool with a broad range of applications and end-users. However, the need to explore and manipulate the complex data generated by long-read sequencing platforms necessitates accompanying specialized bioinformatics platforms and tools to process the long-read data correctly. Importantly, such tools should additionally help democratize bioinformatics analysis by enabling easy access and ease-of-use solutions for researchers.

The Galaxy platform provides a user-friendly interface to computational command line–based tools, handles the software dependencies, and provides refined workflows. The users do not have to possess programming experience or extended computer skills. The interface enables researchers to perform powerful bioinformatics analysis, including the assembly and analysis of short- or long-read sequence data. The newly developed “NanoGalaxy" is a Galaxy-based toolkit for analysing long-read sequencing data, which is suitable for diverse applications, including de novo genome assembly from genomic, metagenomic, and plasmid sequence reads.

A range of best-practice tools and workflows for long-read sequence genome assembly has been integrated into a NanoGalaxy platform to facilitate easy access and use of bioinformatics tools for researchers. NanoGalaxy is freely available at the European Galaxy server https://nanopore.usegalaxy.eu with supporting self-learning training material available at https://training.galaxyproject.org.

<br>
{% twitter https://twitter.com/MiladMiladi_/status/1318645556751859712 %}
