---
title: GalaxyAdmins GCC2015 Meetup
slug: events/gcc2015/bofs/galaxy-admins
---
## Table of contents

* [Audience](#audience)
* [When and Where](#when-and-where)
* [Participants](#participants)
* [Discussion](#discussion)
  * [GalaxyAdmins Meetups](#galaxyadmins-meetups)
    * [Content and Interests](#content-and-interests)
  * [Other Channels / Gatherings](#other-channels--gatherings)
  * [Misc](#misc)
* [Questions?](#questions)

# Audience

If you manage, or are about to manage, a Galaxy installation, then this is an excellent group to become involved with, and this BoF is a rare opportunity to meet your fellow Galaxy managers in person.

# When and Where

This BoF will meet on **Tuesday, 7 July at 18:20, in the Franklin Room, at the JICCC.**

# Participants

* [Hans-Rudolf Hotz](/people/hansrudolf-hotz/)
* [Dave Clements](/people/dave-clements/)
* [Helena Rasche](/people/helena-rasche/)
* Peter Briggs
* Peter Cock
* [Nate Coraor](/people/nate/)
* Oleksandr Moskalenko
* Simon Gladman
* Aaron Petkau
* Eric Enns
* Nuwan Goonasekera
* Ali Al-Shahib
* Martin Cech
* David Kovalic
* Jochen Bick
* Sebastian Schaaf
* Peter van Heusden
* Dustin Cram
* Anmol Hemrom
* Aarif Mohamed Nazeer Batcha
* Michael Riley
* Martin Vickets
* Brad Langhorst
* Carrie Ganote
* and at least 2 others.

# Discussion

## GalaxyAdmins Meetups

* Current format seems good, and meeting bi-monthly is about right.
* Sebastian S: Group has shifted from complaining to much better balance.

### Content and Interests

* Gather top 3 items of concern to the community.  What do people care about?
  * How do we survey to find that out?
* Several people suggested less emphasis on "challenges we addressed in our installation" and more on:
  * Tools for admins (Eric E)
  * how to address identified challenges.
* How do upgrade a Galaxy Server without disturbing your users.
  * Brad: updating code base.
  * Updating is a big issue.  Lots of talk about upgrades and how to do it.
* Eric E: GalaxyAdmins best practices
* Simon: Maybe have training through Galaxy-Admins.

## Other Channels / Gatherings

* Would be nice to have a forum to discuss the most acute item of the month.

* Could we have dedicated time on the IRC?
  * People don't want to wait?
  * Might as well get answers now, instead of wait
  * Left unresolved.

* Peter VH: Use IRC to hack on an area collaboratively.

## Misc

* Alex: Can take the tools shed tables out of the main DB.
* People like GIT.
* Brad annoyed by NFS and how slow it is.
* Lots of complaints about how slow booting is.
  * Seems to be due to reading lots of tools and configs.
  * Means when Galaxy is upgraded, it's down for a while?
  * Lots of concern about downtime after a restart
* Eric Enns: doing cool work with BioBlend to put sequncing files where Galaxy picks them up (and uses symlinks)
* A fair percentage of people in the room deal mainly with "non-standard" genomes.
* Conversation about impresonating users, and really locking it down so this can't be done
* Role based permissions.

# Questions?

Send them to [Hans-Rudolf Hotz](/people/hansrudolf-hotz/) and [Dave Clements](/people/dave-clements/)
