---
title: European Geosciences Union (EGU) 2025
date: '2025-04-27T00:00:00.000Z'
days: 5
tease: A FAIR-EASE session to the European Geoscience Union
continent: NA
location:
  name: Vienna
  url: 'https://www.egu24.eu/'
gtn: true
contact: 'Marie Josse: marie.josse@ifremer.fr'
tags:
  - conference
subsites:
  - all
slug: events/2024-10-24-egu2025
---
## Table of contents

* [The session description](#the-session-description)
* [Come and join us !!](#come-and-join-us-)

# The session description

The Earth System is a complex and dynamic network involving interactions between the atmosphere, oceans, land, and biosphere. Understanding and analyzing data from the Earth System Model is crucial for predicting and mitigating the impacts of climate change.

In this session, we aim to address the challenges of data accessibility and promote integrated use by opening gateways for Earth and environmental sciences. It is essential to enable communication, integration, and data processing for multidisciplinary applications across different fields. This session will highlight current or emerging initiatives, standards, software, or complete IT systems that support environmental data science for a better understanding of the Earth System. The services presented must adhere to the FAIR principles, promoting more robust and transparent research. Additionally, the session will showcase efforts to implement FAIR standards, which are essential for seamless data integration and innovation in Earth Sciences.

We welcome contributions from any origin—whether a European (or not) project, research infrastructure, institute, association, or individual researcher—that presents a vision, service, IT infrastructure, software stack, standard, etc.
In particular, we encourage submission that demonstrate how we can :

* Enhance data by adding semantic annotations or adhering to standards, and ensure its availability through appropriate and efficient services.
* Ensure that metadata, data formats, and access policies align with universally accepted standards to maintain consistency and interoperability.
* Provide tools for analyzing, visualizing and exploring data through interfaces and virtual environments that are both standardized and user-friendly.
* Collaborate with end users to design and present essential information effectively.
* Provide clear and effective training to help users understand and adopt FAIR practices, ensuring they can utilize the services and tools efficiently.

# Come and join us !!
