---
title: Galaxy Developer Roundtable
---

<img class="float-right" style="max-width: 12rem;" src="/src/images/galaxy-logos/galaxy-developer-roundtable-300.png" alt="Galaxy Developer Round Table" />

## What

This is an opportunity for presenters (Galaxy users, developers, admins) to engage with the Galaxy developer community interactively. Some example presentation slots might include:

Small sized slots (~5 min) presenting particular Galaxy issues, well developed questions, or focused advocacy.
Medium sized slots (~10min) presenting big pull requests benefiting from a lot of discussion (from recent examples interactive tools, Galaxy markdown, history rewrite, etc..) or presentations of user or admin stories to advocate to a developer audience.
Longer slots (20min+) to practice conference style-presentations about larger bodies of work.

These are just some initial ideas and time allocation doesn’t need to map cleanly to these ideas. One can easily imagine very long discussions or presentations being relevant to this audience. We only ask presenters to have publicly available slides. If you wish to start a discussion on a particular point, please be ready to lead the discussion and have at least one slide available.

These meetings are intended to be lightweight and informal, these sessions will be cancelled if no one volunteers to present. We expect some weeks no one will have anything to present and this is fine. We won’t track down people to present for the sake of consistency - this is an opportunity for presenters not an obligation for developers generally - the Galaxy committers group may however encourage presentations for large, disruptive PRs to facilitate interactive pull request reviews by more committers.

## Who

Anyone is welcome to attend. If you would like to present, please [fill out this form](https://bit.ly/gxdevroundtablepresent) by midday Wednesday of that week.

## When

Every other Thursday at Noon ET (4pm UTC) as long as there are one or more presenters for that week.

## Meetings

### 2021

* **[2021-05-27: TBD](/src/events/2021-05-27-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Leaders:
* **[2021-05-13: TBD](/src/events/2021-05-13-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Leaders:
* **[2021-04-29: TBD](/src/events/2021-04-29-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Leaders:
* **[2021-04-15: TBD](/src/events/2021-04-15-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Leaders:
* **[2021-04-01: TBD](/src/events/2021-04-01-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Leaders:
* **[2021-03-18: Bringing GPU support to Galaxy](/src/events/2021-03-18-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Leaders: Jashwant Raj, Gulsum Gudukbay
* **[2021-03-04: Release Testing](/src/events/2021-03-04-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Leaders: Sergey Golitsynskiy, David López, Assunta DeSanto, Keith Suderman, John Chilton
  * [Video](https://youtu.be/H4oPneXH5hI)
* **[2021-02-18: Custos in Galaxy - authentication and future directions](/src/events/2021-02-18-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Leaders: Enis Afgan
  * [Video](https://youtu.be/Gjrt_raGAuI)
* **[2021-02-04:Galaxy Developer Training & Onbarding](/src/events/2021-02-04-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Leaders: Dannon Baker, Beatriz Serrano-Solano, Dave Clements, Saskia Hiltemann, Helena Rasche
  * [Video](https://youtu.be/OEKV6GFlD_s)
* **[2021-01-21: FastAPI](/src/events/2021-01-21-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Leaders: Marius van den Beek
  * [Video](https://youtu.be/Oe3vcFr80UE)
* **[2021-01-07: Galaxy Working Groups Follow Up and Discussion](/src/events/2021-01-07-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Leaders: Björn Grüning, Anton Nekrutenko
  * [Video](https://youtu.be/OuxyMWuUBpQ)

### 2020

* 2020-12-24: No Meeting
* **[2020-12-10: Galaxy Working Groups: Distributing project guidance to the community](/src/events/2020-12-10-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Leaders: Björn Grüning, Anton Nekrutenko, [video](https://youtu.be/V87OdtdRLJM)
* 2020-11-26: No Meeting
* **[2020-11-12: Working with the Galaxy Training Network](/src/events/2020-11-12-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Leaders: Helena Rasche and Saskia Hiltemann, [video](https://youtu.be/D8GCuQMjjpw)
* **[2020-10-29: Tool testing and tool deployment](/src/events/2020-10-29-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Presenters: General discussion, [video](https://youtu.be/coKgWylWqNU)
* **[2020-10-15: Galaxy release testing and publishing workflows to Dockstore and Workflowhub](/src/events/2020-10-15-dev-roundtable/index.md/)**
  * Presenters: Sergey Golitsynskiy, Marius van den Beek, [video](https://youtu.be/lGEBWXu6Lvw) 
* **[2020-10-01: Machine learning tools in Galaxy, and enabling per-objectstore quotas in Galaxy](/src/events/2020-10-01-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Presenters: Kaivan Kamali and  John Chilton, [video](https://youtu.be/osbRh36-4dc)
* **[2020-09-03: Interactive PR Commands and Workflow Updates](/src/events/2020-09-03-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Presenters: Alexandru Mahmoud and John Chilton
* **[2020-07-09: COVID work](/src/events/2020-07-09-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Presenter: Anton Nekrutenko,  [Video](https://youtu.be/xQHcceFBBTs?t=104)
* **[2020-06-11: The New History](/src/events/2020-06-11-dev-roundtable/index.md)**
  * Presenter Mason Houtz, [Video](https://youtu.be/yR67bFB6W38)
