---
title: "The 2024 Galaxy Community Update Paper is Here!"
tease: "Discover the latest advancements and future directions of the Galaxy Project in the community's newly published 2024 update paper."
hide-tease: false
authors: "Natalie Whitaker-Allen"
date: "2024-06-10"
tags: ["highlight"]
subsites: [global,all]
---

# The 2024 Galaxy Community Update Paper is Here!

The Galaxy Community is thrilled to announce the publication of our latest update paper, titled "The Galaxy platform for accessible, reproducible, and collaborative data analyses: 2024 update." This paper, authored by The Galaxy Community, provides a comprehensive overview of the progress and goals of the Galaxy Project, highlighting significant advancements and strategic directions.

This update paper is an essential resource for the Galaxy Community and its users. It provides a detailed account of the project's advancements and future directions. We encourage all Galaxy users to cite this paper in their research, ensuring they stay informed about the latest developments and contributions of the Galaxy Project.

## Key Highlights from the 2024 Update

*Global Deployment and User Engagement*

Galaxy continues to be deployed globally, primarily through free-to-use services that support user-driven research. The platform's stability, diverse tool and reference dataset availability, and comprehensive training and support have attracted a growing number of users each year.

*User Experience Design (UXD) Improvements*

Applying the principles of UXD has led to significant enhancements in accessibility and tool discoverability. Notable improvements include the introduction of Galaxy Labs/subdomains and a redesigned Galaxy ToolShed, making it easier for users to find and utilize the tools they need.

*Advanced Tool Capabilities*

Galaxy's tool capabilities are progressing in two strategic directions: integrating general-purpose graphical processing units (GPGPU) access to support cutting-edge methods, providing support for licensed tools, and expanding the range of functionalities available to users.

*Enhanced Engagement with Research Consortia*

The Galaxy Community is increasing its engagement with global research consortia by developing more workflows within Galaxy and enhancing the public Galaxy services to run these workflows efficiently. This collaboration is essential for advancing scientific research and fostering innovation.

*Growth of the Galaxy Training Network (GTN)*

The GTN has seen substantial growth in both size and accessibility. New learning paths and direct integration with Galaxy tools used in training courses have made it easier for users to gain the skills needed for complex data analyses.

*Ongoing Code Development*

Consistent with the Galaxy Project roadmap, code development efforts have focused on improving job scheduling and enhancing the user interface. These improvements ensure a smoother and more efficient user experience.

*Environmental Impact Assessment*

In an effort to promote sustainability, Galaxy now displays estimated CO2 emissions generated by each job. This feature encourages users and developers to be mindful of their environmental impact, aligning with global sustainability goals.

## Future Directions

The Galaxy Project is dedicated to advancing new software technologies, scientific data types, and collaborative research paradigms. Future developments include shared Pulsar servers for better computational efficiency, scratch storage to enhance data processing, and expanded support for diverse research domains. These efforts are rooted in our commitment to accessibility, reproducibility, and transparency in research. We aim to integrate seamlessly with external data sources, computational infrastructure, and third-party tools. By fostering a strong, collaborative community, we ensure continuous improvement of the Galaxy platform, adapting to the evolving needs of the open science community.

---<br><be> 

We extend our utmost gratitude to the entire Galaxy Community for their unwavering support, dedication, and contributions. Your active engagement and collaboration are the driving forces behind the continuous evolution and success of the Galaxy Project. We are advancing the frontiers of accessible, reproducible, and transparent research. Thank you for being an integral part of this journey.
