---
title: "A guide to GCC2022"
tease: "Where Galaxy meets in 2022!"
authors: "Enis Afgan & Subina Mehta"
date: "2022-06-16"
---

The [Galaxy Community Conference](https://galaxyproject.org/events/gcc2022/)
(GCC2022) is an annual gathering of the [Galaxy
Project](https://galaxyproject.org/) community with a primary focus on
dissemination of data-intensive science. Internally, we refer to GCC as a family
reunion because it’s a welcoming, fun event that leaves you inspired and
refreshed. This family is growing and as a result, we wanted to summarize what
to expect from this year’s GCC, or if you are uncertain about your attendance,
give you some reasons why to join - [it is not too
late](https://galaxyproject.org/events/gcc2022/register/).

<div class="center">
<div style="width: 60%; display: inline-block">

![GCC2019 group photo](/images/gcc2019-group-photo.png)

</div>
</div>

The Galaxy community is inclusive and diverse, with GCC reflecting this mindset
through a variety of event types. Particularly if you are new to attending
conferences (and honestly, most of us are a bit rusty after the past couple of
years), here we summarize all the ways you can participate in GCC. At a high
level, GCC offers presentation-style talks, interactive training, brainstorming
sessions, a coding event, and opportunities for networking and socializing. The
talks are centered around (‘omics) analysis methods and results, novel tools,
enabling compute infrastructure, Galaxy software framework features, and
outreach topics. Multi-day training events offer opportunities to go from asking
“*What is Galaxy and what do I use it for?*” or “*How do I scale my analysis to
1,000 samples?*” to being able to do it with confidence only a week later.
Brainstorming sessions, or Birds of a Feather (BoFs), are free-form events that
gather people around a topic of interest to brainstorm ideas or work out details
in depth. The coolest thing about BoFs is that anyone can organize a BoF on any
topic they’d like - even if it has nothing to do with Galaxy or ‘omics! There is
also a CoFest, or a coding event, where you have an opportunity to work on a
project with others or get help from experts. Finally, GCC is all about building
relationships. Throughout the week, there are countless opportunities to network
and socialize, whether that’s during a coffee break, a walk around the city, or
over a chilled beer. Relationships built over such settings often last a
lifetime.

<div class="center">
<a href="https://gcc2022.sched.com/">
  <img src="/images/events/gcc2022/gcc2022-schedule-glance.png" alt="GCC2022 schedule"  style="max-width: 60%; padding-bottom: 1rem;" />
</a>
</div>

Now, if you are wondering about some specifics about what to expect while at
GCC, here are some stats. There are a total of [3 keynote
talks](https://gcc2022.sched.com/overview/type/B.Talks), [3 sponsor
talks](https://gcc2022.sched.com/overview/type/B.Talks), [44 accepted
talks](https://gcc2022.sched.com/overview/type/B.Talks), [28
posters](https://gcc2022.sched.com/overview/type/C.+Poster+%2F+Demo),
[20 live
demos](https://gcc2022.sched.com/overview/type/C.+Poster+%2F+Demo),
[20 training sessions](https://gcc2022.sched.com/overview/type/A.+Training), and
(to date) [9
BoFs](https://gcc2022.sched.com/overview/type/E.+BoFs).
That’s nearly 100 hours of content! The topics covered will encompass
discoveries in biology, development of analysis workflows, software automation
and scaling, application development, outreach lessons, and many others. All of
GCC events are in some way related to Galaxy so if you have any questions or
topics of interest, it is likely those will be answered during GCC. If you are
interested in the Galaxy community as a whole, its structure, and lessons
learned over the years, these will all be laid out during GCC. For full schedule
and details, check out the [schedule page](https://gcc2022.sched.com/).

As we pointed out, GCC is all about networking. Particularly, if you are a
student, [7 sponsors](https://galaxyproject.org/events/gcc2022/sponsors/) will
have their presence at GCC. You can learn about them, from them, and get
introduced - this is an excellent opportunity to meet your potential future
partner in work. Related, the Galaxy community is growing with many labs looking
for people with prior knowledge of the Galaxy platform. The [Galactic Career
Center](https://galaxyproject.org/careers/) board currently lists 7 open
positions around the world. Many of those potential employers will be at GCC, so
take the time to meet them.

<a href="/events/gcc2022/sponsors/">
  <img src="/images/events/gcc2022/gcc2022-sponsors-slice.png" alt="GCC2022 sponsors" />
</a>

Lastly, GCC is a traveling conference. We believe in continuously expanding
horizons and traveling is a big part of that. This year we are in [Minneapolis,
Minnesota](https://www.minneapolis.org/), home of the [University of
Minnesota](https://twin-cities.umn.edu/) and the [GalaxyP
team](http://galaxyp.org/). Minneapolis is a city that embraces nature with
numerous parks, manicured banks of the Mississippi river, and provides access to
numerous lakes nearby. The food scene is first class; there are opportunities to
[see a baseball game](https://www.milb.com/st-paul) during GCC, hear the
[Minnesota Orchestra](https://www.minnesotaorchestra.org/summer), or [watch a
water ski show](http://tcriverrats.com/). A unique event taking place during GCC
is [Aquatennial](https://www.aquatennial.com/) - an annual celebration of
Minneapolis that will conclude with spectacular fireworks on the last day of GCC
CoFest. But don’t take our word for it, check it all out during GCC. Our very
own GalaxyP team is local and happy to share their city and experiences with all
of us.
