---
title: "Galaxy Servers, Cloud, and Deployable Resources"
autotoc: true
layout: use_index.pug
---
The Galaxy Project's public server ([usegalaxy.org](http://usegalaxy.org/)) can
meet many needs, but it is not suitable for everything (see
[Choices](/src/choices/index.md) for why). Fortunately the Galaxy
[Community](/src/community/index.md) has created Galaxy instances in many different forms and for many different applications.

This is a directory of publicly accessible Galaxy servers, cloud services that support Galaxy instances, and virtual machines and containers that can be easily deployed for your own server.  *If you want to use Galaxy with little or no effort creating an instance, this is where you should start.*

# Directories

* [UseGalaxy Servers](/src/use/index.md#usegalaxy-dir)
* [All resources](/src/use/index.md#all-resources)
* [Resources by Platform](/src/use/index.md#by-platform)
  * [Public Servers](/src/use/index.md#public-server)
  * [Commercial Cloud Services](/src/use/index.md#commercial-cloud)
  * [Academic Cloud Services](/src/use/index.md#academic-cloud)
  * [Containers](/src/use/index.md#container)
  * [Virtual Machines (VMs)](/src/use/index.md#vm)

# Resource Keywords

Each resource has a set of keywords associated with them.

## Real keywords 

(*What about listing these by the resource's domain, for example, the research methodology (e.g., RNA-Seq), the clade (e.g., crops), or field e.g., metagenomics) that a resource is targeted at? We are working on it.*)

## Scope

Initially, there is only one keyword per resource and that defines the *scope* of the resource:

### UseGalaxy

UseGalaxy servers implement a common core set of tools and reference genomes, and are open to anyone to use. See the [UseGalaxy directory below](#usegalaxy-dir).  

### Genomics

These servers implement a broad range of tools and aren't specific to any part of the tree of life, or to any type of analysis.

### Domain

Domain resources specialize in either a particular branch of the tree of life or in particular types of analysis. Within their specializations, domain resources offer a wide variety of tools.

### Tool Publishing

Tool publishing resources make tools easily available so that researchers can use them without having to install and use command line versions. The distinction between *domain* resources and *tool publishing* resources is fuzzy. In general, tool publishing resources expose tools from a particular organization, while domain resources include tools / datasets from other organizations and have a larger goal in mind.

# Add a resource to this directory

If you maintain a Galaxy resource that can be listed on this directory, then please **[describe your Galaxy resource here](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1KBkyhAPpgJLanRWBoIHmwtEJELDUifZLUixfoqZXXU4/viewform?usp=send_form)**.
We'll contact you with any question and then post it this directory.

<!---
The rest of this page (the actual directories) are generated by
layouts/use_index.pug
--->

