# Global Galaxy Steering Committee

[Galaxy](/src/index.md) is a mature, successful research software infrastructure project, with a large and diverse global audience. Changes in [project governance structures](/src/community/governance/index.md) are needed to help adapt to increasing complexity.

<div class="lead">
The [Galaxy Executive Committee](/src/community/governance/exec/index.md) has formed the Global Galaxy Steering Committee (GGSC) to represent the interests of communities engaged with the project, and to implement efficient consultative project governance structures for that purpose.
</div>

<br />

## The Manifesto: Global Galaxy Steering Committee Charter

**March 4, 2021**

The GGSC will comprise collaborators from active Galaxy communities and will undertake consultation and projects to advance and sustain the interests of the community of communities now engaged with the project. Two major areas of activity are planned for the first year.

**First, identify the range of common interests and roles shared by project participants in participating communities<sup>1</sup>.** These are an increasingly important part of the project and are the primary issue for the Committee to consider. Our goal is to develop open governance processes that allow communities to contribute to priorities and project planning, so we will develop mechanisms supporting efficient, effective and inclusive representation.

**Second, evaluate and explore the scientific social capital and discovery opportunities generated by these growing communities.** Thousands of scientists from many different disciplines regularly sign on to a Galaxy service to analyse their data. As a result, they join a world wide community using a software framework that encourages collaborative sharing of training resources, tools, workflows and data. A shared analytic platform decreases technical friction, facilitating collaboration on discovery projects within and across disciplines. The tool library helps avoid substantial duplicative technical costs world-wide, as part of the growing social and economic value of this scientific research product. Our goal is to identify, prioritize and support activities that add value to this emergent resource, such as developing novel methods to integrate data across domains, communication mechanisms to support discovering and collaborating with other users, or novel application of standard methods from one domain to appropriate data from another.

See the [Galaxy Governance Model](/src/community/governance/index.md) for how the Steering Committee works with other parts of the community.

<div class="small">
<sup>1</sup> Such as project role (user, educator, system administrator, developer, learner, ..), scientific interest (Genomics, Natural Language Processing,..), institutional and professional affiliations and geographic time zone
</div>
<br />

## Members

* Ross Lazarus, Australia, Chair
* Anne Fouilloux, Norway
* Alan Christoffels, South Africa
* Andrew Lonie, Australia
* Bérénice Batut, Germany
* Björn Grüning, Germany
* Brad Langhorst, United States
* Dan Blankenberg, United States
* David Morais, Canada
* Frederik Coppens, Belgium
* Hans-Rudolf Hotz, Switzerland
* Hervé Menager, France
* Nancy Ide, United States
* Jeremy Goecks, United States
* Maria Doyle, Australia
* Simon Gladman, Australia
* Tim Griffin, United States
* Enis Afgan, United States
